Mark Cohen

NYU Sociology

Classical Theory Comprehensive Exam

6/18/2010

Prof. Craig Calhoun

Prof. Steven Lukes

1\. If social freedom is understood as self-determination on a social scale, how does this take place? Consider the idea of the general will and alternative conceptualizations. How is that general will to be conceptualized? How is "the society" conceptualized? How does this relate to the individual will and its freedom?

Rousseau in *On the Social Contract* poses the problem of social freedom in the following terms: mankind, he says, is naturally free, but in reality human individuals are constrained by social norms and governments. The question, then, is whether and to what extent it is possible for these constraints to be legitimate. Rousseau adopts a very narrow conception of legitimacy, not merely that constraints be just or fair (e.g. the harm principle) but that they actually freely emerge from the individuals who are constrained. The solution he proposes is that individuals commit themselves to the formation of a political community. They thus give up the natural freedom of their particular wills to the communal whole. It is then the general will of this community that imposes constraints on individuals; they therefore are ultimately willed by each individual as a participant in the general will. The citizens, by commiting themselves to participating in the general will, acquire a duty to follow its commands. Since it is of each citizen as much as it of every other member of the community, even if it goes against what a particular individual wants, in being forced to follow the general will, that individual can be said to be being forced to follow *their own* will---that is, to be forced to be free.

For this solution to the problem of how freedom can obtain within the constraints of society to work, Rousseau sketches out a very strict set of conditions. Legislation must be the act of the general will, which can only be spoken for by the assembled community (although the community can temporarily delegate some aspects of government). The problem remains, however, of how to arrive at a correct determination of the general will from among the particular wills of the assembled citizens. The general will is an objective thing, though citizens can misunderstand what the general will actually says and thus enact bad laws. What is necessary is that individuals in assembly speak *qua* citizens, as opposed to private individuals. The identity of citizen is not innate or universal, however; it is a second nature acquired by individuals through being members of a society. They must thus be trained to internalize their identity as citizens: above all by being raised by the institutions and laws of the republic, reinforced by mores (enforced by the Censor) and by expressions of civic religion (which thus must be jealous of the spiritual commitments of citizens insofar as they relate to social life).

Social freedom by this account thus has two sides: 1) that the normative basis of social relations be legislated by a sovereign that is made up of the citizens of a political community, but 2) individuals can only access the general will and effectively act as the sovereign insofar they are substantially citizens, that is to say creatures *of* that political community. The coexistence of these two conditions generates a paradox. Condition (1) depends on the fulfillment of condition (2), but condition (2) is fulfilled, that is to say that individuals are made into citizens, by the functioning of a republic\'s institutions in cultivating citizens. How could it be possible, then, for those institutions themselves to be free in the sense of being the product of the general will in which the members of a community fully participate? That is to say that condition (2) seems to depend on condition (1) as well. Rousseau finesses this paradox with the figure of the legislator. It is the legislator who, borrowing the authority of the gods to present (though not enact) the laws to a people, undertakes the task "to transform each individual (who by himself is a perfect and solitary whole), into a part of a larger whole from which this individual receives, in a sense, his life and his being."^[^1]^ Even then, the freedom of a republic is a fragile and fleeting thing. Its establishment requires the unlikely confluence of favorable conditions of geography, climate, protection of military threat, and sufficient "youth" of a people. The inherent tendency within an established republic, moreover, is towards the decay of freedom by the weakening of individuals\' identities as citizens in favor of private affairs and the gradual accumulation of power by the state.

The overwhelming trend in social thought since Rousseau has been away from this sense that a good society---whether freedom is a core part of that or not---does not rely on good fortune to such an extent. Despite that, however, the broad outlines of Rousseau\'s formulation of the problem of social freedom have loomed large. Thinkers have adopted key elements of his conception but diverged in important ways to circumvent Rousseau\'s paradox. Two main streams of thought, one conservative and the other radical, have echoed Rousseau particularly closely. The conservative line adjusts the requirements for attaining social freedom to in effect claim that a much broader group of political communities are in fact free. The radical line attempts to universalize the concept of the general will to open up the possibility of social *liberation* through its expression.

Edmund Burke\'s polemic against the French Revolution, perhaps somewhat surprisingly, can be seen as sharing important elements with Rousseau\'s understanding of the nexus of society, the individual, and freedom, while making moves to forestall Rousseau\'s paradox. Burke is concerned above all with the security and preservation of the *liberties* of individuals in society, consisting of rights and privileges built up over time. Those rights and privileges are the product of institutions being constructed by trial and error, thereby establishing the patterns of interactions and boundaries among individuals (and institutions). Individuals are inculcated with prejudices that represent the inherited wisdom of social institutions, and more specifically, they are brought up in a particular subgroup in society, and through that participate in society as a whole (this, of course, is the basis of Burke\'s disgust with the nobles who collaborated with Third Estate). What the constitution---as the assemblage of inherited social institutions---grants, then, are the dispositions that correspond to each individual\'s station in society, and thus the specific liberties they possess. Rights and privileges are necessarily unequal to correspond to the necessary inequality in society. This could not be farther from Rousseau\'s conception of a free republic, in which the equality of citizens *qua* citizens is absolutely central. Nonetheless, freedom in society, for Burke as for Rousseau, is a product of individuals being brought up as creatures of a political community\'s institutions. They are *of* it in an essential way. But, unlike the free republic in Rousseau, Burke does not place any important on whether the laws by which they are governed are *of* the citizens or not. Indeed, he renounces the desirability of rationally formulated laws as being beyond the ken of real human beings; the wisdom of history is infinitely preferable.

In the *Philosophy of Right*, Hegel employs a similar theoretical maneuver, while hewing much more closely to Rousseau\'s concepts and emphases in crucial ways. Hegel\'s criticism of Rousseau is that while he rightly emphasizes the character of the sovereign as a will, he makes the mistake of understanding the general will as some kind of combination of particular wills. As stated, this criticism is not quite fair. The real issue is not so much that Rousseau thinks of the general as being the combination of particular wills, but that the general will must be *expressed *by the citizens collectively. In other words, Hegel, like Burke, jettisons the demand that social institutions come from the members of political community in a direct way. Hegel, nonetheless, reclaims the emphasis on generality that Burke lacks (though Hegel too envisions a differentiated society organized by estates). For Hegel, what is absolutely crucial is the existence of a real ethical universal that by becoming the substantial will and ultimate end of individuals is the indispensable basis for individual freedom. It isn\'t worthwhile to go too deeply into how Hegel formulates this position, but the short version is that while individual (Kantian) morality presents the abstract formula in which the will adopts its its own freedom as an end in itself, the concrete content of that freedom can only come from an external, objective source---what he calls "ethical life" and we would probably be content to refer to as society. In the interaction of self-interested individuals in civil society, there is a commonality of life that appears \"negatively\" in interdependence, but that for Hegel is not enough. What is necessary is something to actually and directly represent the commonality of ethical life, and he identifies the state as the entity that can serve this function.

Formally, Hegel\'s concept of ethical life plays a very similar theoretical role to Rousseau\'s general will, down to the emphasis on training individuals to identify with it. Consider the echoes of Rousseau\'s advice to legislators: "Education is the art of making human beings ethical: it considers them as natural beings and shows them how they they can be reborn, and how their original nature can be transformed into a second, spiritual nature so that this spirituality becomes *habitual* to them."^[^2]^ The fundamental difference is that in Hegel\'s conception there is no need---indeed no possibility---for individuals to actively participate in making this highest form of ethical life, the state; the sovereign is not of the citizens, but instead *must* be concentrated on a single individual set above the body politics and representing its unity. Representative institutions (the estates) mediate between the people and the state, and organize the people with respect to the state, but their role is less about policy decisions than information input and distribution. Ironically, the society Hegel sketches is *more liberal* than Rousseau\'s, since the pursuit of private ends in civil society, while it needs to be checked, is not fundamentally problematic. This is paid for, however, by the existence of an external moment of the state\'s absolute unity in the form of the sovereign.

The radical line, in contrast, holds fast to the demand that freedom requires that the determination of the terms of social life be made by the individuals living it. Instead, the radicals weaken the specificity of Rousseau\'s conception of the general will, which is the source of its fragility. What they do, in effect, is to attempt to universalize the general will in the sense that they identify universal (if historically revealed) potentialities in human social relations that are submerged in existing social structures. The possibility exists, then, to *liberate* those potentialities. For the spokesmen of the French Revolution, these possibilities consisted of enlightenment and liberal rights. This is seen clearly in the writings of Condorcet and Paine: while enlightened politics are to some extent an historical achievement for both, they are ultimately generalizable. In *Rights of Man*, Paine maintains that once people wake up to the reality of the political situation, their ignorance cannot be re-established. Once it is realized that status institutions just cover up nature---I don\'t think Paine puts in this way, but they represent a *false* second nature---they can only be abolished. Whereas for Burke, underneath institutions there is nothing to make a society work but brute force, Paine insists that it is possible to create a polity according to universal and rational principles. A free constitution can and must be formalized and written, using knowledge of natural rights as the template that civil rights map onto. Insofar as the rationality that discovers natural rights is universal, so is the possibility of social freedom; insofar as the public can be enlightened, the people can and must freely govern itself.

The critique leveled by later radicals on this is that the supposedly universal, rational, natural rights of the French Revolution were actually a particular statement of the interests and preconceptions of the ideologues of the rising bourgeoisie. This is the line taken by Marx in many of his early writings, notably "On the Jewish Question." Yet Marx\'s formulation of a new radical politics, especially in the *Economic Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844*, is in many ways a continuation of the radical line of revising Rousseau. His concept of the species being represents, analogous to the Enlightenment\'s natural rights, the submerged possibility for the realization of freedom for human beings. Recall again Rousseau\'s formula for social freedom: the determination of social life and thus the constrains on individuals by individuals themselves, insofar as they are members of a community that legislates according to its general will. In other words, individuals are free socially when society is willed by a collective of which they are a part. Marx\'s intervention is to insist that the social production of reality is a fact, but at present, it is only accomplished through alienated labor. That is to say, that it is the aggregate result of workers laboring at the behest of others in order to secure living, and capitalists having others work for them, for profit. While for Rousseau, the reality that a social group is a communal whole is a fragile achievement of institutions, Marx points out that the historical development of capitalism has made it a material fact that the social world confronting individuals is produced by ever-wider collaboration. This then opens up the possibility that if this social production, currently performed by alienated labor, can be brought under conscious, collective control, then Rousseau\'s seemingly paradoxical conception of social freedom can be realized. In other words, Marx\'s contention is that the development of capitalism has led to the generation of an alienated general will included as a real possibility within increasingly socially interconnected economic activity.

Although the conservative line defines it down in important ways and the radical line transforms its basis to universalize it, both of these tendencies in social thought roughly follow Rousseau\'s formulation of the problem of social freedom. There are, of course, alternative conceptions. The early 19^th^ century, in fact, saw the emergence of a number of theories that claimed to be the sequel to 18^th^ century radicalism while rejecting the latter\'s emphasis on freedom. These are, like the radical line, theories of a universal basis for the reformulation of society, but they deny that *political activity* and above all a revolutionary challenge of the existing order are necessary. Owen, Fourier, and Saint-Simon are all instances of this, but Comte can serve as a useful exemplar of the significance of the tendency. Comte insists that a distribution of resources that grants a minority the power to constrain others against their will is an insurmountable condition of social life, and so he renounces the idea that the dominated could forcefully challenge the powerful. He thus attempts to reconcile a continued belief that existing social institutions are fundamentally unacceptable with a refusal to countenance the political tactics of the French Revolution. The ideal of freedom, in the radical form that makes it something achievable universally, necessarily implicates the distribution of political control in society, and so it is ruled out of bounds. The question then becomes not how everyone in a society might participate in the determination of the conditions in which they live, but instead how the disproportionate power of those with material resources might be checked by the moral influence of those without power. There strategies vary, but the so-called Utopian Socialists all try to square this same circle.

Alternatively, liberalism\'s very different understanding of social relations produces a different conception of the problem of freedom. In a caricatured version of libertarianism, freedom is thought of as a linear scale with unconstrained individual action on one side and complete collective control on the other. Spencer comes closest to this; the development from military to industrial society is in large part the move from predominance of the collective to the initiative of individuals. What really holds together the broad liberal line is an understanding of social relations that begins with the individual and radiates outward through the ties that connect that individual to others. The proliferation of such individual connections in fact encourages the flourishing of human beings and thus of society. Whereas for Rousseau, the shift of focus from the community as whole to personal relations or smaller groups within it risks eclipsing the general will with the particular interests of individuals and groups, from the liberal perspective these tendencies are far less problematic. Tocqueville, for instance, shares the concern with individuals becoming too caught up in their private affairs, but his reasoning is that alone, individuals have little capacity or interest in resisting the gradual expansion of state superintendence of their lives. So, concerned with ensuring that individuals are able to muster as much energy in social life from private activity as possible, he sees the concentration of individuals\' capacity for action into voluntary association as an important vehicle for the promotion of freedom in modern, democratic life.

Turning finally to Durkheim---especially in *The* *Division of Labor in Society---*it is possible to see key elements of utopian and liberal ideas reintegrated into terms that have a deep debt to Rousseau\'s conception of the general will. In Durkheim\'s conception, society is an entity, indeed a will with the capacity for compulsion and coercion, which exists objectively and independently of individuals. In an important sense, individuals come out of society, not the other way around. Durkheim thus shares with the conservatives the shift of what in Rousseau is a demanding normative condition into a general characterization of social life, with the consequence that the determination of collective conditions by individuals, crucial to social freedom for Rousseau, loses its importance. He shares with Comte and Saint-Simon a commitment to moral reform that minimizes political struggle. Finally, he takes from the liberals the belief in the desirability of the varied development of individuals.

Durkheim\'s conception of organic solidarity can in fact be understood as an attempt to reconcile his liberal ethical commitments with a conception of society deeply influenced by Rousseau and Comte. The concept of the general will in Rousseau corresponds to Durkheim\'s concept of mechanical solidarity, since each individual confronts the sovereign as fundamentally equal, *qua *citizen. It is the moment of commonality that holds them together, which is why the expansion of private activity, the commitment to subgroups, or the enlargement of territory each tends to weaken citizen\'s connection to the general will. Durkheim, of course, agrees that the long-term trend is for the weakening of mechanical solidarity through the increase in social density, the expansion of the scope of social relations, and thus the ramification of the division of labor. His contention, however, is that these trends are not in themselves disintegrative. Declining (though never disappearing) mechanical solidarity can be replaced by organic solidarity, which arises from the functional interrelation among social organs. What this requires is precisely that individuals\' connection with social whole should *vary* considerably based on the roles they perform. Thus, the integrative task of the state, acting in concert with the professional corporations that Durkheim insists must emerge in society, is not to be the force for the general in the sense of what is common for all, but instead to determine what *specific* norms and duties attach to being a parent, a steelworker, a lawyer, and so on. If there is a concept of freedom accepted by Durkheim, it is probably closest to the liberals\', but he nonetheless reclaims from Rousseau an understanding of society as a social whole in spite of its increasing differentiation, scope, and density.

2\. What is civil society? What are the consequences of its development in terms of the material economy, social relations, and political life? Does it include systematically produced antagonisms among social groups? How, if at all, must its tendencies be complemented or counteracted?

Ferdinand Tönnies\' stark contrast between community (*Gemeinschaft*) and civil society (*Gesellschaft*), while it formulates an exceptionally strong opposition between the two terms, effectively captures many of concerns that unite a long tradition of thought that has only sometimes adopted the term \'civil society\'. The fundamental distinction between Tönnies\' two ideal-typical principles of social organization is that whereas community entails a union of wills providing a foundation of understanding among members, relations in civil society are determined only by the self-interest of individual actors. That is to say that individuals interact in Gesellschaft only insofar and as long as their interests *happen* to coincide. It is possible to refer to a particular entity that is the "civil society" only as an intellectual construct. In contrast, a given community is a real (Tönnies\' term is "organic") social whole with a shared, communal will.

In essence, social relations in civil society are those of a capitalist economy. All interaction are agreements involving equal exchange. Since, moreover, all individuals will only act for others when they receive an equal value in return, competitive bidding will ensure the relative value of different goods is regulated by necessary labor time. There is, in addition, a general tendency for all things that can have value for exchange to come to exist only as objects of exchange---in other words, the process of commodification. In place of the at least quasi-reciprocal authoritarian relations of community, in which dominance and domination are determined by the qualitative character of the individuals involved and deference by the dominated is partially compensated by an expectation of aid and protection by dominant, relative power in civil society is determined by the possession of economic resources. In sum: civil society is a form of social life driven by the self-interested agreements and exchanges of individuals mobilizing privately owned and unequally distributed resources. This form of social life is not always called \'civil society\'---indeed, the term has, in English at least, since then drifted away from this meaning altogether---but attempts to understand its implications and debate its benefits, contradictions, and possible improvements form a deep stream in social thought from the 18^th^ century onward. The problem of civil society is the question of the character of social relations when economically, capitalism dominates.

Civil society can be thought of as liberating individuals from the ties that bind them to the community and restrict their activity in *its *interest, but it can also be seen to be imposing new and in fact harsher demands on individuals in place of those ties, while removing many of the benefits of communal life. In fact, in the form of the accusation of a tendency of commerce to undermine civic commitment, the critique of civil society probably predates its defense. It will be worthwhile, however, to begin here with the apology for civil society before moving onto criticisms and proposed amelioration. Just what is civil society good for?

Paradigmatically, Adam Smith in *The Wealth of Nations*, sets out the position that allowing individuals to freely pursue their interests enables the extension of cooperation through the division of labor and exchange. Actors are individually motivated to save some portion of their income and then invest it productively, and the resulting accumulation and expansion of production creates new opportunities to develop the division of labor and apply labor-saving innovations. The result, then, is that both the quantity of productive capital and its productivity increase from year to year, employing more people productively and making the goods they buy cheaper. Looking at the resulting pattern in society as a whole, and leaving aside moral judgement of the qualitative character of social relations in these circumstances, what Smith emphasizes is that the connections of interrelation and interdependence among individuals are much more numerous and more expansive when people are allowed to pursue self-interest than when they are directed by communal norms---a fact he illustrates with the story of the provisioning of a single English worker. The result in practice has been that the total capacity of human social activity has increased immensely. Moreover, the expansion of cooperation motivated by self-interest serves as a basis for peaceful interactions among individuals and nations. Finally, aside from the material benefits, Smith advances a general conception of liberty that insists that "the ordinary laws of justice" hold that individuals should be able to direct their activity how they see fit, unless an overwhelming social need demands otherwise, and on this basis criticizes restrictions on labor mobility and grain marketing as well as trade protections as both inefficient and unjust.

Since Smith, liberal thinkers have expanded their claims for the virtue of action by self-interested individuals---that is to say, the pattern of civil society. Ricardo advances the conception of the self-regulating market against the possibility of state intervention even more strongly than Smith. Mill seeks to establish individual initiative as a good in itself, while tailoring his utilitarianism to justify individuals in by and large ignoring the impact of their actions on *social* utility---since most of the time their actions will not matter one way or another. Mill also downplays the one shadow remaining in Ricardo\'s theory---the possibility of the rate of profit declining to zero. In Mill\'s *Principles*, even the arrival of the stationary state is something that individuals in civil society can deal with unproblematically; it might not be so bad to live more leisurely, he notes. In general, for Mill, actors in civil society can effectively respond to developments spontaneously. Thus, cooperatives as a solution to the conflict between labor and capital are (he claims) emerging of their own accord---and if they are meeting obstacles, those are primarily the product of the state action.

Finally, Spencer sketches the expansion of individual initiative---essentially tied for him to the weakening of the collective in the form of the state with the receding of the demands of warfare---as a central component of the arc of human social evolution. He promises that individuals will gradually adapt to the new environment: their capacities and tendencies will develop or moderate in response to the demands and stimuli of modern society. Spencer also, however, sounds a harsher note---and this is the key point. Industrial competition, he says, has taken over the role of selection that had formerly been performed by military competition. This selective mechanism is, moreover, essential to progress. Even if some of the weaker components of society have to suffer, it is good for health of the organism as a whole. The final point in the apology for civil society, then---also made by Mill, though in less stark terms---is that while there are undesirable aspects, they cannot be abolished without threatening the overwhelming benefits of the system.

On the whole, however, social theory from the 18^th^ to the early 20^th^ century was especially focused on identifying problems with the form of social relations associated with civil society and proposing solutions. First, the classical critique of commercial activity, seen in Rousseau\'s *On the Social Contract* and Adam Ferguson\'s *An Essay on the History of Civil Society*, is that it encourages a withdrawal into private affairs that is disastrous for the political life of a community. It leads to the weakening of the vitality of public activity, which means that citizens will be less avid in the defense of their rights and of their community if it is threatened. Tocqueville, in *Democracy in America*, adopts and adjusts this critique. His conception of democratization involves the movement of society away from hierarchies of status to consisting of an immense mass of individual, relatively weak actors, each pursuing their own, predominately economic interests. The danger he sees in this is that the tendencies of individuals in this situation will be to want to be left alone to their comfortable private existences. This creates an opportunity---even, given the need for social regulation with the expansion of economic activity, an imperative---for the state to gradually, without ever obtrusively interfering in individuals\' affairs, take an ever greater role in managing social life. The result is a kind of gentle tyranny that does not so much crush individuals as weigh them down and muffle them. What Tocqueville offers is a criticism of civil society following the very ethical notion of the value of human initiative held by the liberal tradition. His solution is, likewise, fundamentally liberal: the engagement of individuals in public life, through, for instance, voluntary associations and local government---activities that, in fact, correspond more closely to the contemporary meaning of \'civil society\'.

Next, almost universally civil society is accused with paradoxically generating suffering among material plenty---and, indeed, nearly historically unprecedented luxury. In Hegel\'s memorable formulation, \" . . . despite an *excess of wealth*, civil society is *not wealthy enough* - i.e. its own distinct resources are not sufficient - to prevent an excess of poverty and the formation of a rabble.\"^[^3]^ The poverty that accompanies prosperity is indeed no accident, but a systematic product of this way of organizing economic activity. Sismondi summarizes the basic mechanism well: increases in productivity benefit the owners of capital instead of allowing workers to receive higher wages or work less for the same income. This, in addition to being irrational for workers themselves, leads to over-production, as all the firms in a sector adopt an innovation and ramp up production. The market, in other words, is not self-regulating for the optimal social outcome. (Marx points out that while dysfunctional for workers, the system is indeed self-regulates well for the interests of capital by maintaining a "reserve army of labor" that, by putting competitive pressure on employed workers, keeps wages comfortably low.) The typical corrective pushed by this line of criticism is intervention by the state. In Hegel\'s terms, it is the duty of the "police" to ensure that the self-interested activity of actors in civil society in fact redounds to the overall social welfare. Sismondi more specifically thinks the state needs to intervene in the interests of workers. Even Marx, though obviously seeing it as only a stopgap, emphasizes the immense importance of England\'s early regulation on the length of the working day in at last enforcing some semblance of humane conditions for factory work. Comte likewise insists on the need for regulation of the activity of especially employers---though for him this regulation can only be moral, after he sours on the state as the agent of regulation of economic life in the *Systeme*.

Moreover, a widely accepted implication is that *under current conditions*, the interests of capitalists and workers are in unending conflict. Given half the chance, employers will pay enough only to get workers back in the door the next day. This would perhaps not be a problem---since, after all, conflict in negotiations is only the result of each side trying to get the best deal, and so it should, in principle, ensure that contracts are in fact fair and equal---except that the conflict does not occur on an even field. Instead, capitalists are at a systematic advantage, because they have the resources to wait out recalcitrant employees, because there are relatively many workers looking for jobs and relatively few employers hiring, and because their relatively small number, privileged social position, and material resources facilitates collusion, often with the state as well, against the interests of workers. In response, it is frequently conceded---and even by Smith, Mill, and Spencer---that workers must be allowed to organize to collectively defend their interests. For the liberals, this entails merely admitting unions as collective entities pursuing their self-interest in civil society. For Comte and Durkheim, however, the organization of workers is needed precisely because it is an avenue to inject a qualitatively different force, namely moral regulation instead of self-interest, into social relations. This gets to the fundamental contrast between the apologists and critics of civil society. For the apologists of civil society, Tönnies\' ideal type more or less corresponds to the actual and unproblematic trend of social development. At any given point, deficiencies might appear, but they are to be met according to the individualistic logic of civil society itself---it might even be counterproductive to attempt any coordinated response. For the critics, however, Tönnies\' model might refer to existing tendencies, but they are on their own incomplete. Forces that complement the disorganized pursuit of self-interest must be injected to establish an effectively functioning society. This is, for instance, the role that Comte ascribes to the positive morality that should be promoted by philosophers, women, and workers.

Durkheim expands this point further by arguing that society cannot and does not operate solely through the voluntarily negotiated agreements of individuals. Aside from the problems of ensuring real equality in negotiations, it would be prohibitively difficult for the contracting parties to negotiate every possible contingency for every single contract. Instead, norms must develop over time for what the particular expectations and duties are for different kinds of functional interactions. Ultimately, the state has to enforce these non-negotiated terms and thereby provide the non-contractual basis without which social activity organized by contracts would be impossible. Durkheim points out, moreover, that some aspects of social life have become *less* open to free negotiation and more closely bound by regulations and duties enforced by the state---he points to the obligations of familial relations as an example.

One final complaint frequently made of civil society is that the specialization it requires of individuals leads to the stunting of their development as human beings. Ferguson, Smith, and Marx all note with chagrin the way in which specialization, especially of workers, leads to the narrowing of their abilities and of their scope of vision to the point where they become little more than cogs in the machines they work at. Their responses are quite varied. Ferguson seems to mostly shrug his shoulders and put it down as one of the inherent, corrupting tendencies of "polished" societies. Smith prescribes liberal education as a way to broaden workers\' horizons, not to mention train them to resist dangerous demagogues. Finally, one of the promises of communism, enunciated in the *German Ideology *and reiterated by Engels\' writing on the division of labor is that singular and narrow specialization is unnecessary; after the revolution it will be possible to vary work and avoid the ceaseless drudgery that characterizes labor under capitalism.

I will close with a fuller account of Marx\'s take on the criticisms outlined here, but before that, it will be worthwhile to return for a moment to Durkheim\'s *Division of Labor in Society*. He acknowledges the empirical purchase of the criticism of the dehumanization of work (and mocks suggestions like Smith\'s that liberal education is the solution), and he concedes that economic relations are presently in a condition of warfare. He vehemently maintains, however, this it is not the product of the division of labor and specialization as such but instead is a symptom of a deviant form, the anomic division of labor. The problem is not the proliferation of functions through the division of labor but that the norms of interaction of the different organs in society are insufficiently developed. Social relations have expanded and differentiated too quickly, and so the newly formed functional interactions have not had sufficiently long or regular contact to normalize their activity. Likewise, it is only specialization that lacks a clear connection with wider social functions that is dehumanizing, and thus as the functional significance of and the norms guiding different activities become clear---with the help, again, of the professional associations---the disorder of economic activity and drudgery of work will gradually fade away.

If Durkheim represents the apogee of the account that says that Tönnies\' conception of civil society is a crucially incomplete account of the modern trend of social life, and which must be and is complemented by other tendencies, Marx\'s understanding of what social relations look like under capitalism is quite close to Tönnies\' (who in fact seems to draw heavily from Marx), but he maintains that for that very reason they must be radically transformed. Fundamentally, for Marx, all schemes to reconcile the oppositions of individual life in civil society by means of a sphere of public, political life in the state are attempts to deny the reality of the thorough-going domination of capitalists. Indeed, he says in *The German Ideology*, the very opposition between individual interests in civil society and the general interest in the state is a characteristic product of capitalist society. The truth is that even the supposed general interest is ultimately determined by the interests of capitalists, and the fictive equality of citizenship cannot be a fix for the real inequality of civil society. Moderating capitalists by morality, schemes of profit-sharing (like those promised by Mill), or intervention by the state only try to treat the symptoms, and likely ineffectively at that. The organization of production through a market populated by privately owned means of production employing wage workers produces the effects *necessarily*. As he says in criticism of the Gotha Program\'s emphasis on distribution of means of consumption: \"If the elements of production are so distributed \[as they are under capitalism\], then the present-day distribution of the means of consumption results automatically.\"^[^4]^ The only solution to the problems of civil society is to transform the relations of production that are characteristic of it---that is to say, communist revolution.

5\. What is the relationship between coercion and political life? Situate your answer in relation to a more general conceptualization of power and its sociological significance. To what extent can the role of violence in social life be superseded? Does violence itself serve a function in historical development?

Burke and Paine, in their debate on the French Revolution, exchange accusations of who is more tainted with rule by bare coercion. Burke paints a lurid picture of the revolutionaries\' activities and the role of the army under the revolutionary government. Paine ascribes what violent outbursts there were to the training the ancien regime gave to its subjects in meanness and violence. In opposition to Burke\'s account of the gradual evolution of constitutional form by trial and error, Paine emphasizes the real origins of almost all existing states of his time in conquest. Violence, he maintains, is part of their genetic makeup. Burke, for his part, cannot maintain that the existing state system is pacifist---without wishing Europe\'s endemic warfare out of existence, that is---but he is committed to the claim that whatever peace holds in social relations is the product of the stability of social institutions, and their destabilization must entail the ascendancy, not the elimination, of brute force. "Every thing depends upon the army in such a government as yours; for you have industriously destroyed all the opinions, and prejudices, and, as far as in you lay, all the instincts which support government."^[^5]^ Joseph de Maistre, in *Considerations on France*, while seconding Burke\'s accusation of the Revolution as fundamentally violent, goes farther by outright celebrating its tempering and cleansing effect on the French nation.

In sum, these three authors crystallize three poles on the connection between violence and politics around the outburst of the French Revolution. For Burke, violence is a force in the human condition that can at best be constrained by social institutions and particularly by political rule. For Paine, it is a product of a given social order; it is above all something inflicted by rulers on their subjects. It is, by implication, not a permanent condition of human social life. For de Maistre, violence gains an historical and social function. These three conceptions have longstanding echoes in social thought.

Elements in Paine\'s account in fact had antecedents. Rousseau, in *The Origin of Inequality*, describes violence as a central accompaniment of the establishment of civilization, especially private property. It is the attempt to claim exclusive ownership that provides the instigation for violent competition. In particular, the organized, ultimately coercive law enforcement of the state is originally the guarantor of the peaceful possession of private property (a point echoed by Smith, among others). However, in the Rousseau of *The Social Contract*, for instance (not to mention in Ferguson), the fact of military competition between societies is inescapable. It is Adam Smith who holds out the hope of commerce as the basis of the peaceful coexistence of individuals and nations, and he blames mercantilistic policies for turning commerce, which should be a form of mutually beneficial interaction, into a kind of warfare. Smith\'s temperament, however, matches up more closely with that of Burke. Though he blames bad institutions for many undesirable social outcomes, he has only limited faith in the ability of human beings to rationally design policies. Moreover, bad policies have a tendency to entrench themselves so that they can be removed only with costly destabilization (a point he makes with reference to colonial policy).

For his part, de Maistre takes to an extreme ideas that are already visible in Ferguson and are part of a long tradition of identifying the functions and benefits of warfare. Ferguson\'s description of barbarian societies---by his definition, semi-civilized societies that do have private property, in contrast with savage peoples, which do not---highlights their greed and rapacity in a context of constant warfare, but at the same time, he identifies among them the laudable qualities of nobility and courage along with the vigor that for him is crucial to establishing and maintaining a free society. In general, conflict is for him the flipside of solidarity. Likewise, in Spencer\'s schema of social evolution the needs of military conflict promote (and follow from) the difficult conditions of premodern social life. The militant organization of society is needed to tame and conquer the world for humanity, and moreover, military discipline is mankind\'s first training in the discipline that is necessary for industrial life as well. Military competition, like the struggle for survival in the animal world, is the selective force driving human social evolution in its early stages, only later to be replaced by economic competition.

Hegel provides an alternative account of the function of violence in history. Since the state is the highest form of ethical life, there is an ethical imperative to form states. Conquest and subjugation cannot be unjust, since it is only the establishment of a state that makes justice a meaningful category. Hegel calls this "the right of heroes," and it represents in effect the response Burke never gave to Paine\'s repeated references to William the Conqueror. Outside of a constitution---in Burke\'s terms---there is no such thing as rights or justice; there can only be the right of the stronger. No matter how violent, the history of the establishment of a constitution out of such a situation thus cannot possibly be wrong, for that would amount to outlawing political liberties and social order as such. It also follow from Hegel\'s position that there is no ethical order above the state that the only law to international relations is the interplay of the interests of states, which make *and break* agreements among themselves. History proceeds through the contingent interrelations and conflicts of states in a dialectical process---what Hegel calls \"the world\'s court of judgement.\"

There is also, however, even among thinkers who concede the function of warfare in certain contexts, a strong stream of thought that promises that historical development will overcome the necessity of violence, both within and among societies. Indeed, for Spencer, the fundamental evolutionary development in human society, which he claims is occurring in his time, is the overcoming of the historical necessity of \"militant\" social organization, which entails the subordination of individuals to the military needs of the society as whole, and its replacement by the free cooperation of liberated individuals in industrial society. His optimism, however, waxes and wanes; writing in 1898, he looks at the scramble for colonial possessions and conflict among the imperial powers and predicts, \"The universal aggressiveness and universal culture of blood-thirst will bring back military despotism, out of which after many generations partial freedom may again emerge.\"^[^6]^ Even in his less disillusioned moments, he accepts the fact that the selection function formerly performed by violence is (for the time-being, at least) replaced by economic competition, though he claims \"aggressive egoism\" is less essential to industrial society than it was to militant (\"extrinsic\" vs. \"intrinsic\"). Even in industrial society, then, some of the poor will find themselves sacrificed on the alter of progress.

Others turn their attention even to the nonviolent conflict of economic competition. For Owen, although the competition of the \"commercial\" system played its role for a time, ultimately the conflict and crime of present society can be removed by a reformed, and more thoroughly social, reconstruction of how individuals are raised, including the substitution of social education for punishment and an emphasis on cooperation instead of competition. The new social order can, moreover, be instituted in isolated communities that do not challenge status quo, and thereby prove itself without coming into conflict with the existing order. Likewise, both Saint-Simon and Comte maintain that the violence and ignorance of earlier periods gave rise to that theocratic and feudal systems that ruled in Europe until the 18th c. Furthermore, the ongoing revolution, which by their conception began with the French Revolution but continues into their time, corresponds to a need for a \"metaphysical\" clean sweep of those earlier systems, which had outlived their usefulness. However, they promise that even the disorder of the "metaphysical" era will be superseded. Comte, especially, maintains that the struggle for wealth and power can be overcome by a morality that fits with new historical conditions. He thus insists repeatedly that the philosophers, workers, and women who are meant to be the agents of his positive philosophy in his later work must renounce the pursuit of power in society in favor of developing the moral force to constrain it.

These thinkers, in their progressivism and optimism for the thorough-going overcoming of violence, can sound more like Paine than Burke, but they in fact concede important points to Burke. Spencer shares with Burke the fundamentally conservative outlook that the change of institutions must not be rushed or forced, and even Owen, Saint-Simon and Comte renounce the option of revolutionary conflict with the existing order. Saint-Simon and Comte fudge the matter by stipulating that the revolution has happened, but they are quite clear about reclaiming important aspects of old regime. As Comte says towards the end of his *Systeme de Politique Positive*, "The true religion has to look for its adherents mainly in the conservative party, but for its origin, it could take its rise nowhere but in the revolutionary camp."^[^7]^ What they have done is drifted away from the oppositional outlook that colors Paine\'s polemic against the violence of the ancien regime. They promise to eliminate the conflictual character of the existing social order, but *not* by challenging those with power in society ---though Comte at least more or less concedes that it is their fault. They turn, instead, to Burke\'s understanding of the establishment of social order through institutions, promising to establish better institutions than currently exist, but dodging Burke\'s attack on the French Revolution by renouncing conflict with the existing order as a means in their reform program.

Marx\'s and Engels\' debates with the anarchists can be pointed to as setting out the content of the basic riposte from the revolutionary tradition to this idea. In various places---notably their writings on the Paris Commune---they insist that in a broad sense they share the ideals of Bakunin and the anarchists. Ultimately, the coercive forces and massive apparatus of the modern state is something to be destroyed by revolution. However---in addition to the fact that some form of at least supervisory authority will need to survive in social production---the irreducible problem is that revolution is a coercive affair. It entails the acquisition of sufficient power by a group that up to that point lacked it to fundamentally reorder social relations against the interests of those who have held power. A revolution is necessary because the powerful will not give up merely in the face of moral suasion, and so revolutionaries must wield coercive authority in accomplishing it. The military and administrative forms of the modern state are, however, the predominant shape that power takes in society, and thus revolutionaries have little choice but to attempt to wrest control of them from their enemies.

In this respect, Marx and Engels coincide with Weber: the ultimate instrument of politics is violence, even if political activity is not usually immediately coercive. Indeed, the attempt to control the means of coercion is, for Weber, definitional of the state and of political activity within it. The distinctively modern state was a product of long-term projects by rulers to monopolize the means of coercion in their own hands through an administrative apparatus directly responsible to them. Weber uses this to develop a conception of an \"ethic of responsibility\" for politicians, according to which they must accept the burden of dealing with potentially ugly methods to achieve their desired ends. The implication, however, is that violence is a permanent feature of social life. Weber probably never had the 19^th^ century hope in overcoming the need for violence that Spencer eventually lost. In other words, the revolutionary tradition for which Marx and Engels speak rejects the possibility of the non-revolutionary removal of violence, but when the late Spencer and then Weber stop believing in it, they cannot find any other alternative to hold up. Instead, Weber hopes for politicians to realistically grapple with the implications of coercion and Spencer ruefully envisions of "many generations" of militancy.

[^1]: *On the Social Contract*, in *The Basic Political Writings*, ed. and trans. Donal A. Cress, (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1987), p. 163.

[^2]: *Elements of the Philosophy of Right*, ed. Allen W. Wood (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991), p. 195

[^3]: *Elements of the Philosophy of Right*, ed. Allen W. Wood (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991), p. 267.

[^4]: "Critique of the Gotha Program," in* The Marx Engels Reader*, ed. Robert Tucker (New York: W. W. Norton and Company, 1978), p. 531.

[^5]: Burke, *Reflections on the Revolution in France* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999): p. 222.

[^6]: Letter to M. D. Conway, in *Herbert Spencer on Social Evolution*, ed. J. D. Y. Peel (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1972): 260.

[^7]: *Auguste Comte and Positivism*, ed. Gertrude Lenzer (New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1975), p. 452.
